---
title: Why We Tackled MyED (Part 1)
description: Our reasoning behind why we thought MyED needed a refresh (it's a long one).
published: 2013-04-15
author: Connor Stuart
---

Hello, I'm Connor - Inf YT's Chief PHP Witch Doctor. I'm here to talk a little about the project that started our fledgling group; the proof-of-concept MyED replacement that we developed for the Smart Data Hack (that netted us the Best Data Mashup award ^_^). Specifically, I'm going to talk about why we decided on it as our project and how we went about implementing it.

Firstly, I'd like to say that neither myself nor the other members set out with this project to evangelise open data. We simply were tired of MyED and wanted to see what we could do to better it. We also thought it was kind of a neat project and a bit different to what the other groups were doing. 

So in the planning stage we were looking at what we would want if we were responsible for delivering MyED (which, for that week, we were!). We quickly realised that Edinburgh wasn't just a University; it was also a big and crowded city that one cannot avoid if they wish to study at the Uni. So we made it a core part of our project that our replacement must try and integrate data relevant to both Edinburgh and the lives of students - being such an international university, these can be very different goals. 

Another goal was to try and have our portal be something more than just a bunch of links to other, more useful, services which is pretty much what MyED is today. Our system should try and bridge the very disperate university systems (which, for those not aquianted with them, include Office 365, Euclid, PT, TimeTab, Learn & DRPS being the most commonly used among many) to provide a central hub in which all actionable information ("notifications") generated by them can be viewed in one place.

These disperate systems did make us realise one thing about the University that we really liked however - [EASE]. [EASE] is the University's central authentication system that with one username and password can log you on to most systems and keep you authenticated as you transition between them. The notable exceptions to this are some School-specific systems (such as the School of Informatics which uses thier own system) and Office 365, which uses the same credentials but requries you to enter them again (slow-clap).

And this brings us onto the final issue we raised, which was the decrepit nature some services had in terms of UI/UX. The Timetabling system Timetab is a very good example of this, but other than from a mostly-unified colour scheme University systems were highly disperate, and almost all lacking, in terms of user experience. So this set us two tasks; build Timetab from scratch (√) and use modern design principles. And by modern design principles, I mean slather Bootcamp on everything.

Oh, hey, I've just given myself a graceful way to transition to talking about implementation and technical issues without awkwardly saying that's what I'm doing (oops). But while we had quickly decided that Bootcamp (that we later skinned to match the University's colour scheme) was the way we wanted to go on UI, we had very seperate ways of going about things based on our previous programming experiences. This created many arguments as whether PHP or Haskell was better (or if one should not pull for 3 days straight, be 47 commits behind and cause merge hell) but the fact was that we just weren't going to learn these other platforms in time to be able to implement the project, so we went with a simpler plan.

I would be responsible for building the core MyED website & authentication system. I did this with a simple PHP/MySQL setup due to my experience with these technologies. To structure the project, and enable quicker PHP development, I settled on using the CodeIgniter framework. This enabled me to rapidly develop the core, and by the end of day 1 I had the authentication system nailed down and a framework of the website.

Meanwhile, the rest of the team were busy developing individual features (such as the timetable replacement) before in the last day we set about trying to mesh Python, Haskell and Node.JS into one coherent web application - with remarkable success. If this experience did teach me anything, it must be the utter horror Information Services experiences in trying to merge some very very different systems together (to get an idea of these troubles, I recommend a gander at www.projects.ed.ac.uk).

So that, my friends, is a look at the internal decision making of why we decided to tackle MyED, along with a lot of buzzwords and some details of how we built it. I would write more, but at this point you've already left. So, I'll leave it until next week (ish) to talk about what features we actually built into our project. 

[Byzies].

<!--footnotes and links-->

[EASE]: https://www.ease.ed.ac.uk/
[Byzies]: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5T75MhFcKM4